Yolo (#344)
johko/computer-vision-course: chapters/en/unit2/cnns/yolo.mdx

The RCNN uses following steps, 

1. Use Selective Search algorithm to select a region. 
2. Use CNN based classifier to classify an object from the region. 

For training purpose, the paper proposed the following steps 

1. Make a dataset of regions detected from the Object detection dataset. 
2. Fine tune Alexnet model on the regions dataset. 
3. Then use the fine tuned model on the object detection dataset. 

The following is a basic pipeline of RCNN 
![rcnn](https://huggingface.co/datasets/hf-vision/course-assets/resolve/main/Fast%20R-CNN.png)

#### Fast RCNN 

Fast RCNN is focused on improvisation over the original RCNN. They added these four improvements

- Training in a single-stage instead of multi-stage like RCNN. Uses multi-task loss
- No disk storage required.
- Introduces ROI pooling layer to only get the features from the  Region of Interests.
- Trains an end-to-end model in contrary to multi-step RCNN / SPPnet models using multi-task loss.

![fast_rcnn](https://huggingface.co/datasets/hf-vision/course-assets/resolve/main/Fast%20R-CNN.png)

#### Faster RCNN 

> 

Author: ```suggestion

The Faster R-CNN completely removes the need for the Selective Search algorithm! These features resulted in an improvement of the inference time by 90% compared to that of Fast R-CNN!!
```

# YOLO 

## A short introduction to Object Detection

Convolutional Neural Networks have taken a big step towards solving the image classification problem.
But there remains another big task to solve: object detection. Object detection not only requires categorizing the object from the image but also accurately predicting its location (in this case, the coordinates of the bounding boxes of the object) in the image. This is where the big breakthrough of YOLO came in. Before delving deeper into YOLO, let's go through the history of object detection algorithms using CNNs.

### RCNN, Fast RCNN, Faster RCNN

> #### RCNN

Author: ```suggestion
#### R- CNN (Region-based Convolutional Neural Networks)
```

RCNN is one of the simplest ways possible to use convolutional neural networks for object detection. In simple terms, the basic idea is to
detect a "region" and then use CNN to classify the region . So this is a multi-step process . Based on this idea the RCNN paper was shared in 2012[1]

The RCNN uses following steps , 

- Use Selective Search algorithm to select a region. 
- Use CNN based classifier to classify an object from the region. 

For training purpose, the paper proposed the following steps 

- Make a dataset of regions detected from the Object detection dataset. 
- Fine tune Alexnet model on the regions dataset . 
- Then use the fine tuned model on the object detection dataset . 

The following is a basic pipeline of RCNN 
![rcnn](https://huggingface.co/datasets/hf-vision/course-assets/resolve/main/Fast%20R-CNN.png)

#### Fast RCNN 

> Fast RCNN is focused on improvisation over the original RCNN. They added these three improvements

Author: ```suggestion
Fast RCNN is focused on improvisation over the original RCNN. They added these four improvements
```

The YOLOv1 design took inspiration from GoogLeNet, which used 1x1 convolutions to reduce the depth of the feature maps. This was done to reduce the number of parameters and the amount of computation in the network. The network has 24 convolutional layers followed by 2 fully connected layers. It uses a linear activation function for the final layer, and all other layers use the leaky rectified linear activation:

$$\text{LeakyReLU}(x) = \begin{cases}
x & \text{if } x > 0\\
0.1x & \text{otherwise}
\end{cases}$$

See figure below for the architecture of YOLOv1.

![v1_arch](https://huggingface.co/datasets/hf-vision/course-assets/resolve/main/yolov1_arch.png)

#### Training
The network is trained end-to-end on the image and the ground truth bounding boxes. The loss function is a sum of squared error loss. The loss function is designed to penalize the network for incorrect predictions of bounding box coordinates, confidence and class probabilities. We will discuss the loss function in the next section.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

YOLO predicts multiple bounding boxes per grid cell. At training time, we only want one bounding box predictor to be responsible for each object. We assign one predictor to be “responsible” for predicting an object based on which prediction has the highest current IOU with the ground truth. This leads to specialization between the bounding box predictors. Each predictor gets better at predicting certain sizes, aspect ratios, or classes of objects, improving overall recall. We will encode this information in the loss function for grid cell $i$ and bounding box $b$ using $\mathbb{1}{ib}^{\text{obj}}$. $\mathbb{1}{ib}^{\text{noobj}}$ is the opposite of $\mathbb{1}_{ib}^{\text{obj}}$.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

A simple function to train such a system is to use a sum of squared error loss. We can use the squared error between the predicted values and the true values, i.e for bounding box coordinates, confidence and class probabilities. 

The loss for each grid cell $(i)$ can look like this:

$$
\mathcal{L}^{i} = \mathcal{L}^{i}_{\text{coord}} + \mathcal{L}^{i}_{\text{conf}} + \mathcal{L}^{i}_{\text{class}}\\
$$

$$\begin{align*}
\mathcal{L}^{i}_{\text{coord}} &= \sum_{b=0}^{B} \mathbb{1}_{ib}^{\text{obj}} \left[ \left( \hat{x}_{ib} - x_{ib} \right)^2 + \left( \hat{y}_{ib} - y_{ib} \right)^2 + 
\left( 
    \hat{w}_{ib} - w_{ib}
\right)^2 + 
\left( 
    \hat{h}_{ib} - h_{ib}
    \right)^2
\right]\\
\mathcal{L}^{i}_{\text{conf}} &= \sum_{b=0}^{B} (\hat{\text{conf}}_{i} - \text{conf}_{i})^2\\
\mathcal{L}^{i}_{\text{class}} &= \mathbb{1}_i^\text{obj}\sum_{c=0}^{C} (\hat{P}_{i} - P_{i})^2
\end{align*}
$$

where
- $\mathbb{1}_{ib}^{\text{obj}}$ is 1 if the $b$-th bounding box in the $i$-th grid cell is responsible for detecting the object, 0 otherwise.
- $\mathbb{1}_i^\text{obj}$ is 1 if the $i$-th grid cell contains an object, 0 otherwise.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

But this loss function does not necessarily align well with the task of object detection. The simple addition of losses for both tasks (classification and localization) weights the loss equally. 

To rectify, YOLOv1 uses a weighted sum of squared error loss. First, we assign a separate weight to localization error called $\lambda_{\text{coord}}$. It is usually set to 5.

So the loss for each grid cell $(i)$ can look like this:
$$
\mathcal{L}^{i} = \lambda_{\text{coord}}
    \mathcal{L}^{i}_{\text{coord}} + \mathcal{L}^{i}_{\text{conf}} + \mathcal{L}^{i}_{\text{class}}\\
$$

> In addition, many grid cells do not contain objects, the confidence is close to zero and thus the grid cells containing the objects often overpower the gradients. This makes the network unstable during training.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In addition, many grid cells do not contain objects. The confidence is close to zero and thus the grid cells containing the objects often overpower the gradients. This makes the network unstable during training.
```

> To rectify, we also weigh the loss from the confidence predictions in the grid cells which do not contain objects less than the grid cells which contain objects. We use a separate weight for the confidence loss called $\lambda_{\text{noobj}}$. It is usually set to 0.5.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To rectify, we also weigh the loss from the confidence predictions in the grid cells that do not contain objects lower than in the grid cells that contain objects. We use a separate weight for the confidence loss called $\lambda_{\text{noobj}}$, which is usually set to 0.5.
```

So the confidence loss for each grid cell $(i)$ can look like this:
$$
\mathcal{L}^{i}_{\text{conf}} = \sum_{b=0}^{B} \left[
    \mathbb{1}_{ib}^{\text{obj}} \left( \hat{\text{conf}}_{i} - \text{conf}_{i} \right)^2 +
    \lambda_{\text{noobj}} \mathbb{1}_{ib}^{\text{noobj}} \left( \hat{\text{conf}}_{i} - \text{conf}_{i} \right)^2
\right]
$$

The sum of squared error for bounding box coordinates can be problematic. It equally weighs errors in large boxes and small boxes. The small deviations in large boxes should not be penalized as much as small deviations in small boxes.

To rectify, YOLOv1 uses a sum of squared error loss for the **square root** of the bounding box width and height. This makes the loss function scale invariant.

So the localization loss for each grid cell $(i)$ can look like this:

$$
\mathcal{L}^{i}_{\text{coord}} = \sum_{b=0}^{B} \mathbb{1}_{ib}^{\text{obj}} \left[ \left( \hat{x}_{ib} - x_{ib} \right)^2 + \left( \hat{y}_{ib} - y_{ib} \right)^2 +
\left(
    \sqrt{\hat{w}_{ib}} - \sqrt{w_{ib}}
\right)^2 +
\left(
    \sqrt{\hat{h}_{ib}} - \sqrt{h_{ib}}
\right)^2
\right]
$$

#### Inference

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Inference is simple. We pass the image through the network and get the $S \times S \times (B \times 5 + C)$ feature map. We then filter out the boxes which have confidence scores less than a threshold. 

##### Non-Maximum Suppression

> In rare cases, for large objects, the network tends to predict multiple boxes from multiple grid cells. To eliminate duplicate detections, we use a technique called non-maximum suppression (NMS). NMS works by selecting the box with the highest confidence score and eliminating all other boxes with an IOU greater than a threshold. This is done iteratively until no overlapping boxes remain.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In rare cases, for large objects, the network tends to predict multiple boxes from multiple grid cells. To eliminate duplicate detections, we use a technique called Non-Maximum Suppression (NMS). NMS works by selecting the box with the highest confidence score and eliminating all other boxes with an IOU greater than a threshold. This is done iteratively until no overlapping boxes remain.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

The end to end flow looks like this:
![nms](https://huggingface.co/datasets/hf-vision/course-assets/resolve/main/object-detection-gif.gif)

## Evolution of YOLO

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> So far, we have seen the basic characteristics of YOLO and how it allows for highly accurate and fast predictions. This was actually the first version of YOLO, called YOLOv1. YOLOv1 was released in 2015, and since then, multiple versions have been released. It was groundbreaking in terms of accuracy and speed since it introduced the concept of using a single convolutional neural network (CNN) that processes the entire image at once, dividing it into an SxS grid. Each grid cell predicts bounding boxes and class probabilities directly. However, it suffered from poor localization and detection of multiple objects in a small image area. In the following years, many new versions were released by different teams to gradually improve the accuracy, speed, and robustness.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
So far, we have seen the basic characteristics of YOLO and how it allows for highly accurate and fast predictions. This was actually the first version of YOLO, called YOLOv1. YOLOv1 was released in 2015, and since then, multiple versions have been released. It was groundbreaking in terms of accuracy and speed, since it introduced the concept of using a single convolutional neural network (CNN) that processes the entire image at once, dividing it into an S × S grid. Each grid cell predicts bounding boxes and class probabilities directly. However, it suffered from poor localization and detection of multiple objects in small image areas. In the following years, many new versions were released by different teams to gradually improve the accuracy, speed, and robustness.
```

### **YOLOv2 (2016)** 

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> After a year of releasing the first version, YOLOv2[5] came out. The improvements focused on both accuracy and speed but also dealt with the localization problem. First, YOLOv2 replaced YOLOv1’s backbone architecture with Darknet-19, which is a variant of the Darknet architecture. Darknet-19 is lighter than the previous version’s backbone and it consists of 19 convolutional layers followed by max-pooling layers. This led to YOLOv2 having the ability to capture more information. Also, it included batch normalization to all convolutional layers and hence, removed the dropout layers dealing with the overfitting problem increasing the mAP. It also introduced the concept of anchor boxes, which added prior knowledge to the detected width and height of the detected boxes (specifically they used). Additionally, to deal with the poor localization YOLOv2 predicted the class and objects for every anchor box and as previously grid (now 13x13). So we have a maximum (for 5 anchor boxes) of 13x13x5 = 845 boxes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A year after releasing the first version, YOLOv2[5] came out. The improvements focused on both accuracy and speed, but also dealt with the localization problem. First, YOLOv2 replaced YOLOv1’s backbone architecture with Darknet-19, which is a variant of the Darknet architecture. Darknet-19 is lighter than the previous version’s backbone, and it consists of 19 convolutional layers followed by max-pooling layers. This led to YOLOv2 having the ability to capture more information. Also, it applied batch normalization to all convolutional layers and hence removed the dropout layers, dealing with the overfitting problem and increasing the mAP. It also introduced the concept of anchor boxes, which added prior knowledge to the width and height of the detected boxes (specifically, they used anchor boxes). Additionally, to deal with the poor localization, YOLOv2 predicted the class and objects for every anchor box and grid cell (now 13x13). So we have a maximum (for 5 anchor boxes) of 13x13x5 = 845 boxes.
```

### **YOLOv3 (2018)**

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> YOLOv3[6] again improved significantly the detection speed and accuracy by replacing the Darknet-19 architecture with the more complex but efficient Darknet-53. Also, it dealt with the localization problem better by using three different scales for object detection (13x13, 26x26, and 52x52 grids). This helped finding the objects with different sizes in the same area. It increased the bounding boxes to: 13 x 13 x 3 + 26 x 26 x 3 + 52 x 52 x 3 = 10,647. The Non-Maximum Suppression (NMS) was still used to filter out redundant overlapping boxes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
YOLOv3[6] again significantly improved the detection speed and accuracy by replacing the Darknet-19 architecture with the more complex but efficient Darknet-53. Also, it dealt with the localization problem better by using three different scales for object detection (13x13, 26x26, and 52x52 grids). This helped find objects of different sizes in the same area. It increased the bounding boxes to: 13 x 13 x 3 + 26 x 26 x 3 + 52 x 52 x 3 = 10,647. Non-Maximum Suppression (NMS) was still used to filter out redundant overlapping boxes.
```

### **YOLOv4 (2020)**

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Back in 2020, YOLOv4[7] became one of the best detection models in terms of speed and accuracy achieving state-of-the-art results on object detection benchmarks. The authors changed the backbone architecture again, opting for the faster and more accurate CSPDarknet53[8]. An important improvement of this version was the optimization for efficient resource utilization, making it suitable for deployment on various hardware platforms, including edge devices. Also, It included a number of augmentations before training that further improved the model generalization. The authors include this improvement in a set of methodologies called bag-of-freebies. Bag-of-freebies are optimization methods that have a cost to the training process but aim to increase the model's accuracy in real-time detection without increasing the inference time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Back in 2020, YOLOv4[7] became one of the best detection models in terms of speed and accuracy, achieving state-of-the-art results on object detection benchmarks. The authors changed the backbone architecture again, opting for the faster and more accurate CSPDarknet53[8]. An important improvement of this version was the optimization for efficient resource utilization, making it suitable for deployment on various hardware platforms, including edge devices. Also, it included a number of augmentations before training that further improved the model's generalization. The authors included this improvement in a set of methodologies called bag-of-freebies. Bag-of-freebies are optimization methods that have a cost to the training process but aim to increase the model's accuracy in real-time detection without increasing the inference time.
```

### **YOLOv5 (2020)**

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> YOLOv5[9] translated the Darknet framework (written in C) to the more flexible and ease of use Pytorch framework. This version automated the previous anchor detection mechanism introducing the auto-anchors. Auto-anchors train the model anchors automatically to match your data. During training, YOLO automatically uses k-means initially and genetic methods to evolve the new better-matched anchors and place them back into the YOLO model. Also, it offered different types of models that depend on the hardware constraints with names similar to today’s YOLOv8 models: YOLOv5s, YOLOv5m, YOLOv5l, and YOLOv5x.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
YOLOv5[9] translated the Darknet framework (written in C) to the more flexible and easy-to-use PyTorch framework. This version automated the previous anchor detection mechanism, introducing the auto-anchors. Auto-anchors train the model anchors automatically to match your data. During training, YOLO automatically uses k-means initially and genetic methods to evolve the new better-matched anchors and places them back into the YOLO model. Also, it offers different types of models that depend on the hardware constraints, with names similar to today’s YOLOv8 models: YOLOv5s, YOLOv5m, YOLOv5l, and YOLOv5x.
```

### **YOLOv6 (2022)**

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

The next version, YOLOv6[10][11], was released by the Meituan Vision AI Department under the article title: "YOLOv6: A Single-Stage Object Detection Framework for Industry." This team made further improvements in terms of speed and accuracy by focusing on five aspects:

> 1) Reparameterization using the RepVGG technique. Which is a modified version of VGG with skip connections. During inference, these connections are fused to improve the speed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1) Reparameterization using the RepVGG technique, which is a modified version of VGG with skip connections. During inference, these connections are fused to improve the speed.
```

2) Quantization of reparameterization-based detectors. Which added blocks that are called Rep-PANs.
3) Recognition of the importance of considering different hardware costs and capabilities for model deployment. Specifically, the authors tested the latency with lowpower GPUs (like Tesla T4) compared to the previous works which mostly used high-cost machines (like V100).

> 4) Introducttion to new types of loss functions such as, Varifocal Loss for Classification. IoU Series Loss  for Boundig Box Regression, and Distribution Focal Loss.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4) Introduction to new types of loss functions such as, Varifocal Loss for Classification. IoU Series Loss  for Bounding Box Regression, and Distribution Focal Loss.
```

5) Accuracy improvements during training using knowledge distillation.

> In 2023, YOLOv6 v3[12] was released with the title: "YOLOv6 v3.0: A Full-Scale Reload," which introduced enhancements to the network architecture and training scheme, once again advancing speed and accuracy (evaluated on the COCO dataset) compared to previously released versions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In 2023, YOLOv6 v3[12] was released with the title "YOLOv6 v3.0: A Full-Scale Reload,", which introduced enhancements to the network architecture and training scheme, once again advancing speed and accuracy (evaluated on the COCO dataset) compared to previously released versions.
```

### **YOLOv7 (2022)**

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> YOLOv7 was released with the paper name: “YOLOv7: Trainable bag-of-freebies sets new state-of-the-art for real-time object detectors”[13][14] by the authors of YOLOv4.Specifically, this version of bag-of-freebies includes a new label assignment method called coarse-to-fine lead guided label assignment and uses gradient flow propagation paths to analyze how re-parameterized convolution should be combined with different networks. They also, proposed  “extend” and “compound scaling” methods for the real-time object detector that can effectively utilize parameters and computation. Again, all these improvements took the real-time-object detection to a new state-of-the-art outperforming previous releases.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
YOLOv7 was released with the paper titled “YOLOv7: Trainable bag-of-freebies sets new state-of-the-art for real-time object detectors”[13][14] by the authors of YOLOv4. Specifically, this version of bag-of-freebies includes a new label assignment method called coarse-to-fine lead-guided label assignment and uses gradient flow propagation paths to analyze how re-parameterized convolution should be combined with different networks. They also proposed “extend” and “compound scaling” methods for the real-time object detector that can effectively utilize parameters and computation. Again, all these improvements took real-time object detection to a new state-of-the-art, outperforming previous releases.
```

### **YOLOv8 (2023)**

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> YOLOv8[15], developed by Ultralytics in 2023 became again the new SOTA. It introduced improvements on the backbone and neck, alongside an anchor-free approach which eliminates the need for predefined anchor boxes. Instead, predictions are made directly. This version supports a wide range of vision tasks including classification, segmentation, and pose estimation. Additionally, YOLOv8 has scaling capabilities with pre-trained models available in various sizes: nano, small, medium, large, and extra-large, and can easily fine-tuned on custom datasets. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
YOLOv8[15], developed by Ultralytics in 2023, became again the new SOTA. It introduced improvements on the backbone and neck alongside an anchor-free approach, which eliminates the need for predefined anchor boxes. Instead, predictions are made directly. This version supports a wide range of vision tasks, including classification, segmentation, and pose estimation. Additionally, YOLOv8 has scaling capabilities with pre-trained models available in various sizes: nano, small, medium, large, and extra-large, and can be easily fine-tuned on custom datasets.
```

### **YOLOv9 (2024)**

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> YOLOv9 was released with the paper name: “YOLOv9: Learning What You Want to Learn Using Programmable Gradient Information”[16][17] by the same authors of YOLOv7 and YOLOv4 . This paper highlights the issue of information loss that existing methods and architectures have during layer-by-layer feature extraction and spatial transformation. To address this issue, the authors proposed:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
YOLOv9 was released with the paper titled “YOLOv9: Learning What You Want to Learn Using Programmable Gradient Information”[16][17] by the same authors as YOLOv7 and YOLOv4. This paper highlights the issue of information loss that existing methods and architectures have during layer-by-layer feature extraction and spatial transformation. To address this issue, the authors proposed:
```

> * Concept of programmable gradient information (PGI) to cope with the various changes
> required by deep networks to achieve multiple objectives.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Concept of programmable gradient information (PGI) to cope with the various changes required by deep networks to achieve multiple objectives.
```

* Generalized Efficient Layer Aggregation Network (GELAN), a new lightweight network architecture that achieves better parameter utilization than the current methods without sacrificing computational efficiency.

> With these changes, YOLOv9 set new benchmarks on the MS COCO challenge

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With these changes, YOLOv9 set new benchmarks on the MS COCO challenge.
```

Taking into consideration the timeline and the different licensing of the models we can create the following figure:
![yolo_evolution](https://huggingface.co/datasets/hf-vision/course-assets/resolve/main/yolo_evolution.png)

### **Note about the different versions**

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> This short chapter presented the history/evolution of YOLO in a linear way. However, this is not the case—many other versions of YOLO were released in parallel. Notice the release of YOLOv4 and YOLOv5 in the same year. Other versions that we did not cover include YOLOvX (2021) which was based on YOLOv3 (2018), YOLOR (2021) which was based on YOLOv4(2020), and many others.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This short chapter presented the history/evolution of YOLO in a linear way. However, this is not the case—many other versions of YOLO were released in parallel. Notice the release of YOLOv4 and YOLOv5 in the same year. Other versions that we did not cover include YOLOvX (2021), which was based on YOLOv3 (2018), and YOLOR (2021), which was based on YOLOv4 (2020), and many others.
```

> This short chapter presented the history/evolution of YOLO in a linear way. However, this is not the case—many other versions of YOLO were released in parallel. Notice the release of YOLOv4 and YOLOv5 in the same year. Other versions that we did not cover include YOLOvX (2021), which was based on YOLOv3 (2018), and YOLOR (2021), which was based on YOLOv4 (2020), and many others.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This short chapter presented the history/evolution of YOLO in a linear way. However, this is not the case — many other versions of YOLO were released in parallel. Notice the release of YOLOv4 and YOLOv5 in the same year. Other versions that we did not cover include YOLOvX (2021), which was based on YOLOv3 (2018), and YOLOR (2021), which was based on YOLOv4 (2020), and many others.
```

> Also, It is important to understand that the selection of the ‘best’ model version depends on the user requirements such as speed, accuracy, hardware limitations, and user-friendliness. For example, YOLOv2 is very good at speed. YOLOv3 provides a balance between accuracy and speed. YOLOv4 has the best ability for adapting/being compatible across different hardware.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Also, it is important to understand that the selection of the ‘best’ model version depends on the user requirements, such as speed, accuracy, hardware limitations, and user-friendliness. For example, YOLOv2 is very good at speed. YOLOv3 provides a balance between accuracy and speed. YOLOv4 has the best ability for adapting or being compatible across different hardware.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## Reference 

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
